In the first video
I looked at the illusions
we construct to deny death
and how they lead
to divisive and disproportionate
emotional responses to folks
who don't share those illusions.
In this second video,
I'll be exploring several
other grave subjects,
including the label of
'pro-mortality atheist',
the demands of immortality,
the claim that there are
no atheists in foxholes,
and the possibility of peace of mind
without recourse to illusion.
Clearly, inventing illusions to deny death
hasn't brought the peace of mind
we might've hoped for.
Our poorly-constructed
fantasies of immortality
unable to withstand scrutiny or challenge
have inevitably created deep divisions
which remain despite
attempts to smooth over them
with a veneer of multiculturalism.
A veneer that can swiftly dissolve
when death raises its bony head.
So what about aiming
for literal immortality?
A few months ago QualiaSoup and I
were labelled 'pro-mortality atheists',
because we pointed out
that while death brings endings
for which we often feel
unprepared or ill-equipped,
without it, there'd be
no space for new life.
But this isn't a pro-mortality position.
It's a practical recognition of the fact
that our resources are not limitless.
If we're going
to try and introduce
a limitless demand
within a limited system,
we need to address the mechanics of that.
And let's be honest with ourselves.
we're already buckling
at the limits of our resources
sustaining mortal existence.
As wildlife is displaced to meet
the demands of our sprawling
agricultural crops,
many species are being pushed toward
- and beyond - precarious levels.
We're nowhere near
sustained survival in space,
let alone the colonisation
of other planets,
so at the moment,
this Earth is all we have.
Will we be able to discipline ourselves,
prepare for these thresholds of expansion,
and try to work within our current limits?
Or are we going to deny
the existence of those limits
and walk obliviously towards
unknown levels of crisis.
Engineer Saul Griffith
conceptualised the problem
in terms of energy consumption.
At the moment, our global
energy consumption is 13 terawatts.
In our population of around 6 billion,
that averages to 2.2 kilowatts per person,
although national
averages vary hugely.
Consumption in the US is
11.4 kilowatts per person.
Assuming an equal consumption
of 5 kilowatts per person by 2035
- that's 30 terawatts in total -
Griffith set about showing
the level of resources
that kind of demand would require,
if we exclude fossil fuels.
If we aim to achieve
5 terawatts of that total
through conventional nuclear energy,
that requires 5000 nuclear
reactors over 25 years.
Getting another 5 terawatts
from wind energy
would require a new, full-size
3-megawatt wind turbine every 3 minutes,
eventually covering 2% of all land area.
Finding 10 terawatts through solar energy
would mean manufacturing 250
square metres of solar cells per second.
And if we apportion
2 terawatts to bio fuels,
we'll need to generate
4 olympic swimming pools
of genetically engineered
bacteria per second.
That still leaves 8 terawatts
unaccounted for.
But something else we've failed
to account for is population growth.
While the current figure
is around 6 billion,
by 2035, that's expected
to increase to around 8 billion.
If no one died starting today,
that would soar to over 10 billion.
This highlights the issue of reproduction.
If we were able
to put off death indefinitely,
would we go on producing children?
If so, how many would we spawn
in our lifetime? Hundreds? Thousands?
Saul Griffith's statistics
are based on our current lifestyles.
Of course immortality doesn't necessarily
mean immortality in our present form.
But whatever our proposed form,
immortality would require
two essential conditions.
The first is eternal sustainability.
That means the immortal
system can't be subject
to terminal degenerative
processes such as ageing.
We have already encountered
human cells with this property.
The HeLa cell came from the cervical cells
of one Henrietta Lacks in 1951.
Where most human cells are limited
in the number of times they can divide,
the HeLa cell seems to have bypassed
this natural in-built senescence.
It's been reproduced
in gargantuan quantities
and involved in all kinds of research
including tests for polio vaccinations,
the effect of zero gravity on human cells,
gene mapping, and cancer research
which is appropriate considering
the cervical cells in question
were cancer cells.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, growth control's
been cited as a major issue,
with the HeLa cell becoming a significant
contaminant among other cell cultures.
But even assuming stable
sustainability could be met
in whatever biological
or non-biological form
we come up against the second
essential condition: indestructibility.
To achieve immortality,
the agent must also be impervious
to all fatal damage from external agents.
We have identified a life-form
with extraordinary resilience
to environmental extremes.
The tardigrade reaches up to
one-and-a-half millimetres,
and can survive within
a huge temperature range,
from almost absolute zero
to around 150 degrees centigrade;
they can withstand doses of radiation
hundreds of times beyond
the threshold of other animals;
they've reportedly endured pressures
around six times that
of the Mariana Trench,
11 km below the ocean's surface,
and survived for days
in the vacuum of space.
But all this is nothing compared to
the demands of immortality,
which necessitates
the endurance or avoidance
of every conceivable environmental hazard.
We have, in effect
to become universe-proof.
Aside from the more dramatic phenomena
like black holes and
the collision of galaxies,
there are the more mundane problems.
If we found ourselves encased in rock
for thousands of years,
what might that do to us psychologically?
But let's race by these concerns
and skip to the finish.
Ultimately we begin to refer
to end-of-universe events,
like the big crunch, or heat death.
When we begin to acknowledge any
universal end which we can't surpass,
the discussion shifts from immortality
to indefinite longevity.
In the absence of indestructibility
a counter-intuitive irony emerges.
Far from decreasing
our anxiety around death,
we raise it to its highest possible level.
If we hope for 70 or 80 years of life,
losing a few years,
maybe even a few decades,
can feel a substantial loss.
But if we achieve eternal
ageless individual sustainability,
the prospect of death is raised
to an indefinitely vast loss.
In part one of this series,
I explored some of the divisive and
destructive psychological defences
we currently employ to deny death.
Imagine the extremity of defences needed
when that loss is multiplied indefinitely.
Neither I nor QualiaSoup
are pro-mortality.
Acknowledging the limits we live with is
not equivalent to being in favour of them.
But we are mindful of the fact that any
bid for significantly enhanced longevity
will require a considerable rethink
in regard to our physical resources,
as well as considerable
psychological preparations.
In 2008 my partner of ten years
was diagnosed with lymphoma
- cancer of the lymphatic system -
and within hours of that diagnosis
descended to full life support.
We were all told to expect the worst.
For days, we did what we could
to prepare for the end.
I noticed superstitious ideas
bubbling up inside me all the time.
Ideas like: 'Don't change your route
to the hospital. Change equals death.
If you stick to the same route,
nothing'll change.'
I knew what these thoughts were about.
They were my attempt to find some
tiny sense of control over a situation
in which I felt utterly powerless.
So I changed my route to the hospital
and I resisted several similar notions.
But eventually I did succumb
to a supernatural comfort.
I began to fantasise about
a magic button I could push,
that would instantly swap our places.
I'd be the one in that hospital bed,
about to die.
I longed for that button to materialise.
Throughout those days, I just kept
pushing my thumb down on thin air.
The dissonance was tremendous.
I wanted so desperately for it to be true,
that my awareness that
it was a fantasy became painful.
Then the day finally came
when I didn't need the button any more.
With a last-ditch
experimental drug combination,
the doctors achieved
what no superstition can.
Through the application
of scientific knowledge and skill,
they prevented death.
My partner made a full recovery
and we were married later that year.
Throughout that entire experience,
the idea of any life beyond this one
never crossed my mind.
All I could stretch to was a death swap.
After that experience,
facing my own possible death in these
last few months was a walk in the park.
Not a single superstitious
fantasy this time.
It's simply not true that
there are no atheists in foxholes.
But those who regurgitate
this thought-terminating cliché
unwittingly concede a remarkable own goal.
Even if the odd atheist did find
divine ideas frothing up
in their mind in their last moments,
are those desperate, irrational,
psychological defences,
mobilised by a fear of imminent death,
actually being defined as 'theism'?
Let's boil down
what's being proposed here:
an atheist clutching at straws
in a state of fear is a theist.
What an extraordinarily revealing
commentary on the nature of faith.
Some people have asked how I've found
peace of mind in regards to my own death.
For me, it's about fully embracing
the fact I have nothing to prepare for.
As humans, we have a peculiar
vulnerability to anxiety.
We're not confined to reacting
in the here-and-now.
We've developed the capacity
to look deeply into the future.
To anticipate problems
and prepare for them.
Where preparation's possible,
we can act purposefully and productively.
But when preparation isn't possible,
we have nowhere useful
to channel our energies.
If our drive to prepare persists,
we descend into neurosis,
obsessive, unproductive,
impotent thoughts and actions.
But there is another option.
To stop preparing.
To bring our thoughts and actions
in line with reality.
There are few times in life
when we get to be absolved
of all possible responsibility
for something.
Death provides that
liberating opportunity.
If we're honest with ourselves,
and manage to let go of our denials,
we'll acknowledge the fact that death lies
intrinsically outside of our experience.
Just like the time before our birth.
We don't look back on that
pre-conscious time with intense emotion.
And we needn't do so with death.
This sentiment's been echoed
by many writers over the centuries.
Mark Twain, for instance,
who famously said:
"I do not fear death ...
I had been dead for billions
and billions of years before I was born,
and had not suffered
the slightest inconvenience from it."
Over two thousand years ago, Lucretius put
forward a similar 'symmetry' argument,
that those who fear future non-existence,
should contemplate their
past non-existence.
If we allow ourselves to contemplate
that past non-existence,
we might find our fears about
returning to it simply fall away.
Far from being incompatible
with a realistic awareness of death,
peace of mind can come
as a direct result of it.
Therapy works by bringing what's
out of our awareness into our awareness
exposing our illusions,
our assumptions, our defences.
Sometimes we come to therapy
because coping strategies
that once seemed helpful
are no longer working for us,
or actively working against us.
When we become conscious of these
inner conflicts and how they hold us back,
we have the chance of letting go of them
and moving forward.
It's not an easy process,
our defences are there for a reason,
and sometimes removing them will put us in
touch with great pain and vulnerability.
The prospect of facing that,
after years of comforting denial
can feel daunting,
sometimes overwhelming.
Even clients who seem genuinely motivated
can start sabotaging their own therapy
finding excuses not to put
a plan of action into work,
maybe even forgetting
to turn up to sessions.
Sometimes a move towards health
can feel like a backward step.
It might mean
taking more responsibility,
getting less attention,
feeling less powerful, less special.
As Freud noted:
'The patient wants to be cured,
but he also wants not to be'.
We see echoes of these processes
played out on a global scale.
Illusion and denial
covering pain and fear.
Dysfunctional cultural
coping mechanisms, like religion,
which once might've seemed
to offer great peace,
but which have become
their own problem to be coped with,
actively stifling our progress,
holding us back at a primitive stage
of development we've long outgrown.
Mechanisms we perpetuate,
by injecting them into our children
before they can even think,
forcing them to share our denial,
never giving them the chance
to experience the pain of realistic loss,
and work through it
in a productive and healthy way.
And making it all the more devastating
when they discover it's all lies.
Like the client in therapy,
some of us wish to let go
of these illusions and move forward,
while others resist.
Again, a move towards health might seem
like a backward step to some
making some of us feel less special,
taking away some power, some attention,
requiring greater personal responsibility,
as our trespasses are not
magically forgiven,
our guilt is not transubstantiated
into innocence.
Giving up these false comforts,
dismantling these fantasies,
is no mean feat.
They are the most seductive,
beguiling ideas humans have invented,
drilling right down into
our deepest fears and vanities.
Are we ready to bring these illusions
into our collective consciousness?
To confront our fears,
rather than recoil from them?
A few years ago in a video
exploring my transition to atheism,
I included a brief contemplation
on the tasks involved in leaving
a comforting illusion.
Many of us have made that transition.
I hope many more will find
the strength to do so.